---
title: "Pentasyllabics"
date: 2018-03-11
tags:
  - Snapshots
toc: true
---

# This is just how I talk

Diglossia is the segregation of the use of two language varieties on the basis
of function by members of a speech community. That's a pile of jargon. If you
use one language or dialect in formal situations, and another in informal ones,
then you are likely a part of a diglossic speech community. 

Previous Linguists have named these informal contexts Low (domestic, local) and
call the formal context High (academic, national, global). I will call them
Formal and Informal.

New York, like many states, has General American English (GAE) and African
American Vernacular (AAVE) (also known as Black American English, or Ebonics)
among its many dialects. AAVE is unique because despite being easily
identifiable as dialect of English, it has a distinctive grammar. Copula
deletion and negative concord are two of its features.

In school, they don't teach AAVE. If anything, the opposite is true. My teachers said
"Repeat after me. Ain't is Not a word" and "people will respect you more if you
speak *proper* English." When I went home, I spoke Creole. On the news, I heard
GAE. In TV shows, GAE. On the internet, GAE...

I never spoke Inner City English because my teachers told me it was wrong. They
said was not even a "real language." Now I know better. Enough about me. AAVE is
real. All dialects are real, valid, and have the expressive power to change the
world.

So, sorry when my language doesn't live up to your expectations for a black
person. I've been told I speak like I'm reading out an essay. I've been told
that I sound pretentious, jargony, *excessive.* I've even been accused of using
words whose meanings I don't know. Imagine that.

Language is how we interface with the world. Perhaps we should all reflect of
how language biases shape our interactions. As an SAT tutor, my first lesson of
grammar starts with an affirmation and a commitment. "Ungrammatical in the eyes
of the College Board doesn't mean you should change part what makes you who you
are."
