---
title: "The Open Source Workflow: Part 1"
date: 2018-05-06
author: "Blake Vente"
category: "Workflows"
---

# Open Source: What is it and why should you care?

## Disclaimer

Let's say you already know what open source means. If you came here for a
comprehensive historical perspective on open source, I'm sorry to disappoint.
I'm severely unqualified to talk about that. But, there are plenty of resources
where you can learn about the Open Source movement's history.
[Here](https://tobsta.github.io/OpenSource/#/more-info/) is a great starter
guide on how to purify your software life.

## My Adventure

Today, nearly all of the software on my computer is Open Source. That means not
only is it free to use, but I can edit any line of code I want, recompile, and
run it for whatever reason I want without having to explain what I'm doing to
anyone. There is no central owner of the code. Everyone owns it, no one owns it.
Pick your choice. Either way, no one gets to tell you what you can or can't do
on your computer. Your machine belongs to you.

One of the things that got me interested in Law is how companies managed to get
a hold of people for duplicating media they already owned. If you have a
physical copy of, I don't know, *Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone* and you
let your friend borrow the book, then you're solid. If you have a digital copy
and you make a copy of it and email it to your friend, you might have just
committed a crime, *Digital Piracy*. I think that policy might be sensible under
some conditions, but today, I refuse to validate proprietary media by writing it
myself. I'm determined to change the world by offering my innovations to
everyone and anyone who wants to use them. I can't speak for my future self all
that much. A lot can change and surviving can get harder. But for now, my mind
is set on bettering the lives of those around me.

But it wasn't always that way. Well... that's only a bit true.

My adventure starts in Year 2 of Brooklyn Latin. I had just gotten my first
DSLR, and I was excited to be shooting in RAW for the first time ever. What
problem did I face? Well, I didn't have access to Lightroom or Photoshop or any
RAW editing software to do the trick. I wasn't about to drop 700 dollars on a
fresh license either. I did what any child of the internet would do. I found
free versions online. One of the pieces of software that I found was called
Darktable and I credit much of my artistic development to it. Without it, I
wouldn't have a college essay to write, without it, I might not even be here in
Macaulay.

Darktable, that RAW editing software only had a Linux version at the time. They
have since changed, remarking that "Hell froze over," and now they even have a
Windows version. So why am I going on about this *one* piece of software when
now I'm running open source *everything?* It was the driving force that made me
change. After that, I always had Linux in my life.

So when I said, "That's only a bit true," I mean that while I didn't always have
Linux, I always made Latin review sheets to help out my peers in Latin class. I
heard that someone was selling sheets of nothing more than Latin verb tables. I
was appalled to learn how much they were ripping people off. I got on it myself,
and before long, tons of people could rely on me to organize the material for the
current unit and get it looking spiffy in a PDF. By the end of the 2nd year, it
looked like [this](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ir1l_D7eqO1MdigaZ1L_7LccUWvnlZKR/view?usp=sharing).

Few moments would pride me more than when someone said "Thanks for the doc,
Ralph," or, "You really saved my Latin grade with that sheet, man." Of course, I
would respond, "Nah, you're the one that actually studied," or something like
that. And that's always just been the way I am. I'm not tying to paint myself in a
too positive light. I just want to maybe say that, if I could do it, maybe you
can do something like that too. Don't get me wrong, I know *actually
contributing* to an open source project is really tough, but it's worth
considering, even if you're not a programmer.

## Why should I care?

This may have been an interesting tangent, but let's get back on topic. Why
*should* you care? Well, I can't tell you why it's meaningful for everyone, but
I can tell you how I feel. There's never any paywalls, and that's very
liberating. You never have to worry about another expense when you're trying to
make it out here as a college student. That makes sense, but there's free stuff
everywhere, right? Why should I "De-Google" myself? Isn't all their stuff is
free?

Here's were things get a little hard to explain. As usual, I'll try my best.
Whatever company you choose, if a service its service is free, you are the
product. You have a comprehensive analysis done of your browsing history. They
target ads to you, and make money doing it. That sounds innocent, right? I'd
like to challenge that.

With the recent fiasco involving Cambridge Analytica, you can start to
appreciate how important your data is. There's much more than you at stake here.
We are vulnerable to structure change on the whole of society if we allow a
central power control of media and consequently our opinions. A few years ago,
this idea would be swiftly filed away under "BS Conspiracy Theory." Now we all
have to give it some thought.

So, if you're a tiny bit uneasy about what you post, where, and what it's being
used for, maybe you should give Open Source a shot. Over the next few weeks,
I'll be delving into my Open Source workflow and annotating it every step of the
way. In the next post, I'll outline a few of my Favorite open source
replacements to proprietary software, and how I use it. Thereafter, I'll
actually show my document tree and help you navigate it.

And of course, I understand that moving to a new platform seems insurmountable.
That's still the case for some things I see day to day. Just allow me to
demystify it for you, so that even if you don't switch, at least you can
understand a little about where all those penguinistas are coming from.
